website/content/docs/api-gateway/upgrade-specific-versions.mdx, before:

---
layout: docs
page_title: Upgrading Specific Versions
description: >-
  Consul api gateway versions v0.2.x introduced a change to namespace backend ref
  enforcement that will potentially break any routes created with a cross namespace in
  v0.1.0. This documents the flow for finding and remediating any potentially
  broken routes
---

# Upgrading Specific Versions


## Consul API Gateway v0.1.0

This guide explains how to best upgrade a Consul API Gateway deployment that is currently
running v0.1.0 to all future versions. v0.2.0 introduced a breaking change that
causes routes defined with a BackendRef defined in a different namespace to
require a [ReferencePolicy](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/v1alpha2/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2.ReferencePolicy)
that explicitly allows traffic from the route's namespace to the BackendRef's namespace.



### Requirements

- The consul-api-gateway should be running version v0.1.0. If the version is different, follow the normal upgrade path.
- **Optional** [jq](https://stedolan.github.io/jq/download/) is installed on the users CLI


Note: As of writing, v0.1.0 is the only previous release. A standardized upgrade path will be documented with future releases.

### Pre-requisites

In order to follow this guide, the following conditions must be true:

- You have the ability to run Kubectl CLI commands
- Your kubectl config is already configured to point at the cluster with the installation you are upgrading
- You have HTTPRoute.read, TCPRoute.read and ReferencePolicy.create rights on your Kubernetes cluster


### Procedures

**1.** Optional, double check the current version of the consul-api-gateway with the following command:

```shell-session
$ kubectl get deployment --namespace consul consul-api-gateway-controller --output=jsonpath= "{@.spec.template.spec.containers[?(@.name=='api-gateway-controller')].image}"
```

If the output looks as follows:

```log
"hashicorp/consul-api-gateway:0.1.0"
```

 Continue following this upgrade path.

**2.** Retrieve all routes that have a backend in a different namespace:

There are two ways to retrieve cross-namespace routes:

1. Method 1 is more manual but requires no additional dependencies
1. Method 2 is faster but requires that [jq](https://stedolan.github.io/jq/) be installed

##### Method 1: Manual

Get all HTTPRoutes and TCPRoutes across all namespaces with the following command:

```shell-session
$ kubectl get HTTPRoute,TCPRoute -o json -A
```

If you have any active HTTPRoutes or TCPRoutes, you should recieve output that looks as follows. Note, The output has been truncated to only show fields relevant to this guide.

```yaml
...

apiVersion: v1
items:
- apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2
  kind: HTTPRoute
  metadata:
    name: example-http-route,
    namespace: example-namespace,
    ...
  spec:
    parentRefs:
    - group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
      kind: Gateway
      name: gateway
      namespace: gw-ns
    rules:
    - backendRefs:
      - group: ""
        kind: Service
        name: web-backend
        namespace: gateway-namespace
        ...
      ...
- apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2
  kind: TCPRoute
  metadata:
    name: example-tcp-route,
    namespace: a-different-namespace,
    ...
  spec:
    parentRefs:
    - group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
      kind: Gateway
      name: gateway
      namespace: gateway-namespace
    rules:
    - backendRefs:
      - group: ""
        kind: Service
        name: web-backend
        namespace: gateway-namespace
        ...
...

```

For each of the above defined routes, you will need to inspect each of the backendRefs.

If there is no namespace field defined or the namespace matches the namespace defined on the route, that backendRef requires no further action.

If there is a namespace defined and it does not match the namespace defined on the route, make a note of the backendRef's Kind, Group, Name, Namespace as well as the Kind and Namespace of the route.
You will need to use those later. Keep going until you have a list of all routes that require a reference policy. The above output would yield a list that looks as follows.

```yaml

  example-http-route:
    - namespace: example-namespace
      kind: HTTPRoute
      backendReferences:
        - group : ""
          kind: Service
          name: web-backend
          namespace: gateway-namespace

  example-tcp-route:
    - namespace: a-different-namespace
      kind: HTTPRoute
      backendReferences:
        - group : ""
          kind: Service
          name: web-backend
          namespace: gateway-namespace
```

If after inspecting your routes, your list is empty, you may skip to the last step.

##### Method 2: Using jq

Get all HTTPRoutes and TCPRoutes, using jq to filter for routes that require a ReferencePolicy.

```shell-session
$ kubectl get HTTPRoute,TCPRoute -o json -A | jq -r '.items[] | {name: .metadata.name, namespace: .metadata.namespace, kind: .kind, crossNamespaceBackendReferences: ( .metadata.namespace as $parentnamespace | .spec.rules[] .backendRefs[] | select(.namespace != null and .namespace != $parentnamespace )  )} '
```

Note, the above command will retrieve all HTTPRoutes and TCPRoutes. TLSRoutes and UDPRoutes are not supported in v0.1.0.

If your output is empty, you can skip to the last step; otherwise, you have existing routes that require a new ReferencePolicy. In this case, your output will appear similar to the following:

```log
{
  "name": "example-http-route",
  "namespace": "example-namespace",
  "kind": "HTTPRoute",
  "crossNamespaceBackendReferences": {
    "group": "",
    "kind": "Service",
    "name": "web-backend",
    "namespace": "gateway-namespace",
    "port": 8080,
    "weight": 1
  }
}
{
  "name": "example-tcp-route",
  "namespace": "a-different-namespace",
  "kind": "TCPRoute",
  "crossNamespaceBackendReferences": {
    "group": "",
    "kind": "Service",
    "name": "web-backend",
    "namespace": "gateway-namespace",
    "port": 8080,
    "weight": 1
  }
}
```

**3.** Create a ReferencePolicy to allow cross namespace traffic for each route service pair.

Using the list of routes you created earlier as a guide, create a [ReferencePolicy](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/v1alpha2/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2.ReferencePolicy) to allow cross namespace traffic.
You will need to create a reference policy that explicitly allows each cross namespace route to service pair to prevent the route from breaking. If you've already created a ReferencePolicy you can skip this step.
<!---
TODO: add link to our docs on Cross Namespace Reference Policies, once we have written then, and tell the user to see them for more details on how to create these policies.
--->
For example, the above output would require a reference policy that looks as follows.

Note, the ReferencePolicy should be created in the same namespace that it is allowing traffic to

<CodeBlockConfig filename="referencepolicy.yaml">

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: ReferencePolicy
metadata:
  name: reference-policy
  namespace: gateway-namespace
spec:
  from:
    - group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
      kind: HTTPRoute
      namespace: example-namespace
    - group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
      kind: TCPRoute
      namespace: a-different-namespace
  to:
    - group: ""
      kind: Service
      name: web-backend
</div>
```
</CodeBlockConfig>

Edit your ReferencePolicy so all routes are allowed and then save into a file called referencepolicy.yaml

Run the following command to apply it to your cluster

```shell-session
$ kubectl apply -f referencepolicy.yaml
```

Repeat as needed until each of your cross namespace routes have a corresponding  reference policys.

**4.** Upgrade your deployment to v.0.2.0.

Install the updated CRDs into your cluster

``` shell-session
$ kubectl apply --kustomize="github.com/hashicorp/consul-api-gateway/config/crd?ref=0.2.0"
```

**5.** Helm upgrade Consul

Upgrade your consul installation using helm.

~> This will cause the Consul API Gateway controller to be shut down and restart with the new version

```shell-session
$ helm upgrade --values values.yaml --namespace consul --version <NEW_VERSION> hashicorp/consul <DEPLOYMENT_NAME>
```

**6.** Refresh gateway deployments
A requirement of the Kubernetes Gateway API specification is that the settings of the [Gateway Class](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/v1alpha2/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io%2fv1alpha2.GatewayClass) are only applied to a gateway when the gateway is created. For that reason, in order to see the effects on preexisting gateways, once you've upgraded your CRD installation,  you will need to delete and recreate any gateways.

To accomplish this you can run the following two commands:

~> This will delete and recreate your gateway.


```shell-session
$ kubectl delete -f <path_to_gateway_config.yaml>
$ kubectl create -f <path_to_gateway_config.yaml>
```

<!---
  remove this warning once updating a gateway triggers reconciliation on child routes
--->

~> Optionally, you might want to delete and recreate your routes following the same pattern, as when you update your
gateway, it might take a long time for its attached routes to reconcile and start reporting bind errors.


### Post-Upgrade Configuration Changes

No configuration changes are required for this upgrade.

Commit message:

added note about unsupported route types to manual mathod

website/content/docs/api-gateway/upgrade-specific-versions.mdx, after:

---
layout: docs
page_title: Upgrading Specific Versions
description: >-
  Consul api gateway versions v0.2.x introduced a change to namespace backend ref
  enforcement that will potentially break any routes created with a cross namespace in
  v0.1.0. This documents the flow for finding and remediating any potentially
  broken routes
---

# Upgrading Specific Versions


## Consul API Gateway v0.1.0

This guide explains how to best upgrade a Consul API Gateway deployment that is currently
running v0.1.0 to all future versions. v0.2.0 introduced a breaking change that
causes routes defined with a BackendRef defined in a different namespace to
require a [ReferencePolicy](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/v1alpha2/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2.ReferencePolicy)
that explicitly allows traffic from the route's namespace to the BackendRef's namespace.



### Requirements

- The consul-api-gateway should be running version v0.1.0. If the version is different, follow the normal upgrade path.
- **Optional** [jq](https://stedolan.github.io/jq/download/) is installed on the users CLI


Note: As of writing, v0.1.0 is the only previous release. A standardized upgrade path will be documented with future releases.

### Pre-requisites

In order to follow this guide, the following conditions must be true:

- You have the ability to run Kubectl CLI commands
- Your kubectl config is already configured to point at the cluster with the installation you are upgrading
- You have HTTPRoute.read, TCPRoute.read and ReferencePolicy.create rights on your Kubernetes cluster


### Procedures

**1.** Optional, double check the current version of the consul-api-gateway with the following command:

```shell-session
$ kubectl get deployment --namespace consul consul-api-gateway-controller --output=jsonpath= "{@.spec.template.spec.containers[?(@.name=='api-gateway-controller')].image}"
```

If the output looks as follows:

```log
"hashicorp/consul-api-gateway:0.1.0"
```

 Continue following this upgrade path.

**2.** Retrieve all routes that have a backend in a different namespace:

There are two ways to retrieve cross-namespace routes:

1. Method 1 is more manual but requires no additional dependencies
1. Method 2 is faster but requires that [jq](https://stedolan.github.io/jq/) be installed

##### Method 1: Manual

Get all HTTPRoutes and TCPRoutes across all namespaces with the following command:

```shell-session
$ kubectl get HTTPRoute,TCPRoute -o json -A
```

If you have any active HTTPRoutes or TCPRoutes, you should recieve output that looks as follows. Note, The output has been truncated to only show fields relevant to this guide.

Note, the above command will retrieve all HTTPRoutes and TCPRoutes. TLSRoutes and UDPRoutes are not supported in v0.1.0.

```yaml
...

apiVersion: v1
items:
- apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2
  kind: HTTPRoute
  metadata:
    name: example-http-route,
    namespace: example-namespace,
    ...
  spec:
    parentRefs:
    - group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
      kind: Gateway
      name: gateway
      namespace: gw-ns
    rules:
    - backendRefs:
      - group: ""
        kind: Service
        name: web-backend
        namespace: gateway-namespace
        ...
      ...
- apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2
  kind: TCPRoute
  metadata:
    name: example-tcp-route,
    namespace: a-different-namespace,
    ...
  spec:
    parentRefs:
    - group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
      kind: Gateway
      name: gateway
      namespace: gateway-namespace
    rules:
    - backendRefs:
      - group: ""
        kind: Service
        name: web-backend
        namespace: gateway-namespace
        ...
...

```

For each of the above defined routes, you will need to inspect each of the backendRefs.

If there is no namespace field defined or the namespace matches the namespace defined on the route, that backendRef requires no further action.

If there is a namespace defined and it does not match the namespace defined on the route, make a note of the backendRef's Kind, Group, Name, Namespace as well as the Kind and Namespace of the route.
You will need to use those later. Keep going until you have a list of all routes that require a reference policy. The above output would yield a list that looks as follows.

```yaml

  example-http-route:
    - namespace: example-namespace
      kind: HTTPRoute
      backendReferences:
        - group : ""
          kind: Service
          name: web-backend
          namespace: gateway-namespace

  example-tcp-route:
    - namespace: a-different-namespace
      kind: HTTPRoute
      backendReferences:
        - group : ""
          kind: Service
          name: web-backend
          namespace: gateway-namespace
```

If after inspecting your routes, your list is empty, you may skip to the last step.

##### Method 2: Using jq

Get all HTTPRoutes and TCPRoutes, using jq to filter for routes that require a ReferencePolicy.

```shell-session
$ kubectl get HTTPRoute,TCPRoute -o json -A | jq -r '.items[] | {name: .metadata.name, namespace: .metadata.namespace, kind: .kind, crossNamespaceBackendReferences: ( .metadata.namespace as $parentnamespace | .spec.rules[] .backendRefs[] | select(.namespace != null and .namespace != $parentnamespace )  )} '
```

Note, the above command will retrieve all HTTPRoutes and TCPRoutes. TLSRoutes and UDPRoutes are not supported in v0.1.0.

If your output is empty, you can skip to the last step; otherwise, you have existing routes that require a new ReferencePolicy. In this case, your output will appear similar to the following:

```log
{
  "name": "example-http-route",
  "namespace": "example-namespace",
  "kind": "HTTPRoute",
  "crossNamespaceBackendReferences": {
    "group": "",
    "kind": "Service",
    "name": "web-backend",
    "namespace": "gateway-namespace",
    "port": 8080,
    "weight": 1
  }
}
{
  "name": "example-tcp-route",
  "namespace": "a-different-namespace",
  "kind": "TCPRoute",
  "crossNamespaceBackendReferences": {
    "group": "",
    "kind": "Service",
    "name": "web-backend",
    "namespace": "gateway-namespace",
    "port": 8080,
    "weight": 1
  }
}
```

**3.** Create a ReferencePolicy to allow cross namespace traffic for each route service pair.

Using the list of routes you created earlier as a guide, create a [ReferencePolicy](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/v1alpha2/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2.ReferencePolicy) to allow cross namespace traffic.
You will need to create a reference policy that explicitly allows each cross namespace route to service pair to prevent the route from breaking. If you've already created a ReferencePolicy you can skip this step.
<!---
TODO: add link to our docs on Cross Namespace Reference Policies, once we have written then, and tell the user to see them for more details on how to create these policies.
--->
For example, the above output would require a reference policy that looks as follows.

Note, the ReferencePolicy should be created in the same namespace that it is allowing traffic to

<CodeBlockConfig filename="referencepolicy.yaml">

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: ReferencePolicy
metadata:
  name: reference-policy
  namespace: gateway-namespace
spec:
  from:
    - group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
      kind: HTTPRoute
      namespace: example-namespace
    - group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
      kind: TCPRoute
      namespace: a-different-namespace
  to:
    - group: ""
      kind: Service
      name: web-backend
</div>
```
</CodeBlockConfig>

Edit your ReferencePolicy so all routes are allowed and then save into a file called referencepolicy.yaml

Run the following command to apply it to your cluster

```shell-session
$ kubectl apply -f referencepolicy.yaml
```

Repeat as needed until each of your cross namespace routes have a corresponding  reference policys.

**4.** Upgrade your deployment to v.0.2.0.

Install the updated CRDs into your cluster

``` shell-session
$ kubectl apply --kustomize="github.com/hashicorp/consul-api-gateway/config/crd?ref=0.2.0"
```

**5.** Helm upgrade Consul

Upgrade your consul installation using helm.

~> This will cause the Consul API Gateway controller to be shut down and restart with the new version

```shell-session
$ helm upgrade --values values.yaml --namespace consul --version <NEW_VERSION> hashicorp/consul <DEPLOYMENT_NAME>
```

**6.** Refresh gateway deployments
A requirement of the Kubernetes Gateway API specification is that the settings of the [Gateway Class](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/v1alpha2/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io%2fv1alpha2.GatewayClass) are only applied to a gateway when the gateway is created. For that reason, in order to see the effects on preexisting gateways, once you've upgraded your CRD installation,  you will need to delete and recreate any gateways.

To accomplish this you can run the following two commands:

~> This will delete and recreate your gateway.


```shell-session
$ kubectl delete -f <path_to_gateway_config.yaml>
$ kubectl create -f <path_to_gateway_config.yaml>
```

<!---
  remove this warning once updating a gateway triggers reconciliation on child routes
--->

~> Optionally, you might want to delete and recreate your routes following the same pattern, as when you update your
gateway, it might take a long time for its attached routes to reconcile and start reporting bind errors.


### Post-Upgrade Configuration Changes

No configuration changes are required for this upgrade.
